Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: propofol.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Good morning. Let us begin with propofol. Tell me what propofol is, chemically,
and how it is presented for clinical use.
Propofol is two-six di-isopropylphenol, a substituted phenol and an alkylphenol.
It is a small, highly lipophilic molecule that is almost insoluble in water,
so it cannot be presented as a simple aqueous solution.
It is formulated as an oil-in-water emulsion: one per cent propofol by weight,
with the lipid phase usually long-chain soya bean oil at ten per cent,
emulsified with purified egg phosphatide, and made isotonic with glycerol.
The emulsion is white and slightly opaque because of light scattering by the lipid
droplets.
Different preparations add an antimicrobial retardant — the original used disodium
edetate, while others use sodium metabisulphite or benzyl alcohol — because the
lipid emulsion is an excellent culture medium and has historically been implicated
in infective outbreaks when sterility was breached.
A little history, since you raise the formulation.
How did we arrive at this emulsion?
Propofol was developed by John Glen and colleagues in the nineteen-seventies.
The earliest formulation used a polyethoxylated castor oil, Cremophor,
as the solubilising agent, but that was abandoned because of anaphylactoid
reactions, and the drug was reformulated in the soya bean oil emulsion we use
today, marketed as Diprivan and now widely available as generic preparations.
The generics differ chiefly in their antimicrobial retardant and in whether they
use purely long-chain or a mixture of medium- and long-chain triglycerides,
which is relevant to injection pain and to the free aqueous propofol concentration.
You mention the emulsion supports microbial growth.
What practical consequences follow from that?
Strict asepsis when drawing up, single-patient use,
and discarding any drawn-up propofol or running infusion within the manufacturer's
stated window — commonly within six hours for a drawn-up syringe,
and the giving set changed at least every twelve hours,
sooner if local policy dictates.
The retardants slow but do not abolish growth,
so the discipline around handling remains essential.
The classic teaching point is the cluster of postoperative infections traced
historically to contaminated propofol,
which drove the addition of the antimicrobial agents in the first place.
Now describe propofol's mechanism of action.
Propofol acts principally at the gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptor — the
GABA-A receptor — which is a ligand-gated chloride channel and the major inhibitory
receptor in the central nervous system.
Propofol binds at a site distinct from the benzodiazepine and barbiturate sites,
on the transmembrane domain, and it potentiates the action of GABA:
at clinical concentrations it increases the channel's affinity for GABA and
prolongs channel opening, while at higher concentrations it can directly activate
the channel.
The result is increased chloride conductance, hyperpolarisation of the neurone,
and reduced excitability. There is interest in the beta subunit,
particularly a specific point in the beta-three subunit,
as critical to the hypnotic and immobilising effects.
Propofol has effects at other targets too — it modulates some sodium channels and
has actions at glycine and nicotinic receptors — but the GABA-A potentiation is the
dominant mechanism for hypnosis.
What happens to the electroencephalogram as you deepen propofol anaesthesia?
As the dose increases, the electroencephalogram shows a progression from the
low-amplitude fast activity of the awake state through increasing amplitude and
slowing — more theta and delta — and then, at deep levels,
periods of electrical silence interrupting the activity, which is burst suppression.
With still deeper dosing this proceeds towards an isoelectric trace.
Processed electroencephalographic monitors translate this into an index;
values in the region of forty to sixty are generally targeted for surgical
anaesthesia.
This relationship between dose and electroencephalographic pattern is the basis on
which propofol is titrated to a defined depth in total intravenous anaesthesia,
and the reason such monitoring is recommended when a neuromuscular blocking drug
would otherwise mask awareness.
Does propofol provide analgesia?
No. Propofol is a pure hypnotic with no meaningful analgesic action;
indeed it may be mildly antanalgesic at sub-hypnotic doses.
That is why a total intravenous technique with propofol must always be paired with
an analgesic component, classically an opioid such as remifentanil,
and why propofol alone is inadequate for any stimulating procedure.
It does, however, have useful antiemetic and mild euphoriant and anxiolytic
properties, and it suppresses airway reflexes well,
which is why it is favoured for laryngeal mask insertion.
Take me through the pharmacokinetics. Why does a single induction dose wear off so
quickly?
Propofol is best described by a three-compartment model.
After a bolus into the central compartment — blood and the vessel-rich group — the
plasma concentration falls very rapidly,
principally by redistribution into the second compartment,
the well-perfused lean tissues, and then more slowly into the deep,
poorly perfused fat compartment.
Recovery from a single induction dose is therefore a redistribution phenomenon,
not an elimination phenomenon: the brain concentration falls as drug moves down its
gradient into muscle, and the patient wakes within minutes even though the drug is
still very much present in the body.
The distribution half-life is of the order of two to four minutes;
the terminal elimination half-life is far longer, several hours,
but that long tail is clinically silent after a single dose because so little drug
remains in the central compartment.
The volume of distribution at steady state is very large,
well in excess of total body water,
reflecting the drug's lipophilicity and extensive tissue sequestration.
And its clearance — there is something notable about the figure.
Yes. The clearance of propofol is very high,
of the order of thirty to sixty millilitres per kilogram per minute,
which exceeds hepatic blood flow. That tells us elimination cannot be by the liver
alone — there must be significant extrahepatic metabolism.
The lungs are an important site of first-pass uptake and metabolism,
and the kidneys and gut contribute as well.
Hepatic metabolism itself is rapid conjugation — glucuronidation of the parent
phenol and hydroxylation followed by glucuronide and sulphate conjugation — to
water-soluble, largely inactive metabolites excreted in the urine.
Because clearance exceeds hepatic blood flow,
propofol behaves as a high-extraction, flow-limited drug,
and its metabolism is relatively well preserved even in significant hepatic
impairment.
Define context-sensitive half-time and explain why it matters for propofol.
The context-sensitive half-time is the time taken for the plasma concentration to
fall by fifty per cent after stopping a continuous infusion that has maintained a
steady concentration; the context is the duration of that infusion.
It matters because, unlike the elimination half-life,
it reflects what actually happens during recovery from an infusion,
accounting for redistribution from the peripheral compartments back into plasma.
For propofol the context-sensitive half-time rises only modestly with infusion
duration and plateaus — even after many hours it remains of the order of tens of
minutes — because the drug is cleared so efficiently and the deep compartment does
not return drug quickly.
This favourable, relatively flat context-sensitive half-time is precisely why
propofol is so well suited to total intravenous anaesthesia and to prolonged
sedation, in contrast to drugs whose context-sensitive half-time climbs steeply.
Let us move to pharmacodynamics. Describe propofol's effects on the central nervous
system.
Propofol produces dose-dependent hypnosis. It reduces the cerebral metabolic rate
for oxygen, and through flow-metabolism coupling it reduces cerebral blood flow and
cerebral blood volume, which lowers intracranial pressure.
However, because it also lowers mean arterial pressure,
cerebral perfusion pressure — mean arterial pressure minus intracranial pressure —
may be threatened if hypotension is not controlled,
so the net effect on the injured brain depends on maintaining systemic pressure.
Propofol is anticonvulsant and is used to terminate refractory status epilepticus,
although excitatory phenomena such as myoclonus and opisthotonos can occasionally
be seen on induction, which can be confused with seizures.
Cerebral autoregulation and carbon dioxide reactivity are largely preserved.
It is also favoured in neuroanaesthesia where evoked-potential monitoring is
required, because it interferes less with motor evoked potentials than the
volatiles do.
Is there a neuroprotective role, and what about status epilepticus specifically?
Propofol reduces cerebral metabolic demand and has been studied as a
neuroprotectant, but the clinical evidence for a durable protective benefit is not
convincing, so I would not claim it protects the brain in the way the laboratory
data once suggested.
In refractory status epilepticus it is one of the recognised agents for inducing a
therapeutic burst-suppression coma, alongside midazolam and thiopental,
titrated to electroencephalographic burst suppression.
The caution is that the high doses and prolonged infusions required in that setting
are exactly the conditions that predispose to propofol infusion syndrome,
so the cumulative dose must be watched very closely.
And the cardiovascular effects?
Propofol causes a fall in arterial pressure that is often more pronounced than with
other induction agents.
The mechanism is a combination of arterial and venous vasodilatation — reducing
both afterload and preload — together with a degree of direct myocardial depression
and a reduction in sympathetic tone.
Importantly it blunts the baroreceptor reflex,
so the expected compensatory tachycardia is attenuated and the heart rate may
remain unchanged or even fall.
Bradycardia, and rarely asystole, can occur,
particularly when propofol is combined with other vagotonic drugs such as
remifentanil or with vagal surgical stimulation.
The hypotension is exaggerated in the elderly, the hypovolaemic,
and those with limited cardiac reserve,
which is why the dose must be reduced and titrated slowly in those groups,
and why I would have a vasopressor immediately available.
What about respiration?
Propofol is a potent respiratory depressant.
An induction dose typically produces a period of apnoea,
often longer than with thiopental, preceded by a reduction in tidal volume and
respiratory rate.
It blunts the ventilatory response to hypoxia and hypercapnia,
and it markedly depresses upper airway and laryngeal reflexes — an advantage for
inserting a supraglottic airway, but a hazard in the unprotected airway.
It is a bronchodilator and does not provoke histamine release in the way some
agents do, so it is a reasonable choice in the patient with reactive airways.
Give me the dosing. How would you induce a fit fifty-year-old,
and how does that change with age?
For a fit fifty-year-old I would expect an induction dose in the region of one and
a half to two and a half milligrams per kilogram of lean body weight,
titrated to effect rather than given as a fixed bolus,
watching for loss of verbal contact and of the eyelash reflex.
In the elderly the dose should be reduced substantially — often by a third to a
half — and given more slowly, because both the pharmacokinetics and the
pharmacodynamics shift towards greater sensitivity and more profound hypotension.
In children the requirement per kilogram is actually higher,
because of a larger central compartment and higher clearance,
so induction doses are larger on a weight basis.
For sedation, sub-hypnotic infusion rates are used and titrated carefully,
and for maintenance by total intravenous anaesthesia I would use a
target-controlled infusion or a manual regimen guided by an appropriate
pharmacokinetic model.
You mention target-controlled infusion. What models do you know,
and what does the device actually target?
A target-controlled infusion uses a programmed pharmacokinetic model to calculate
the infusion rate needed to achieve and maintain a user-set target concentration.
For propofol the established adult models are the Marsh model,
which is weight-based, and the Schnider model,
which incorporates age and lean body mass and is the more refined;
the Eleveld model is a newer general-purpose model intended to apply across a wide
range of ages and body habitus.
The clinician sets either a plasma-site target or an effect-site target.
Effect-site targeting drives a higher initial plasma concentration to speed
equilibration with the brain, achieving the desired effect more quickly at the cost
of a transient plasma overshoot.
The device does not measure concentration; it predicts it,
so clinical titration and, where available,
processed electroencephalographic depth monitoring remain essential.
If you had no target-controlled pump, how would you run a manual propofol infusion?
I would use a recognised manual regimen such as the Bristol or ten-eight-six
scheme: after an induction bolus, an infusion of ten milligrams per kilogram per
hour for the first ten minutes, then eight for the next ten minutes,
then six thereafter, adjusting to clinical signs and depth monitoring.
This stepped reduction approximates the falling requirement as the peripheral
compartments fill.
Whichever method I used, I would ensure a reliable, visible,
dedicated intravenous line with anti-reflux and anti-siphon precautions,
because an unrecognised infusion failure or tissued cannula is a recognised cause
of awareness under total intravenous anaesthesia.
You touch on awareness. What did the national audit of accidental awareness teach
us that is relevant here?
The fifth national audit project on accidental awareness during general anaesthesia
found that total intravenous techniques,
and particularly the combination of intravenous induction with a neuromuscular
blocking drug and transfer or movement of the patient,
were over-represented among awareness reports.
The lessons were practical: maintain anaesthesia during transfer and intubation,
keep the infusion line visible and protected,
be wary of the period of pump changeover,
use depth-of-anaesthesia monitoring when neuromuscular blockade is used with a
total intravenous technique, and treat any unexplained patient movement or
autonomic response as possible light anaesthesia.
It reframed total intravenous anaesthesia as a technique demanding specific
vigilance rather than an inherently risky one.
Beyond theatre, where do we use propofol for sedation,
and what principles govern its safe use?
Propofol is widely used for procedural sedation — endoscopy, cardioversion,
radiological procedures — and for sedation in intensive care.
Its appeal is rapid titratability and clear-headed recovery.
The governing principle is that propofol readily produces a depth of sedation that
shades into general anaesthesia with loss of airway reflexes,
so it should be given by someone trained and equipped to rescue the airway and
manage cardiovascular depression, with full monitoring including capnography and
oxygen, and ideally by a practitioner not simultaneously performing the procedure.
In intensive care it is a first-line sedative in adults but, as noted,
is avoided for prolonged sedation in children because of the infusion-syndrome risk.
Let us talk about the hazards. What is propofol infusion syndrome?
Propofol infusion syndrome is a rare but frequently fatal complication of propofol
administration, classically associated with high doses given over a prolonged
period.
The accepted threshold of concern is an infusion exceeding roughly four milligrams
per kilogram per hour continued beyond about forty-eight hours,
although it has been reported at lower doses and shorter durations.
The underlying problem is thought to be impairment of mitochondrial fatty-acid
oxidation and of the respiratory chain,
so that cells cannot generate energy from fat,
leading to a failure of cardiac and peripheral muscle.
The clinical picture is a high-anion-gap metabolic acidosis with raised lactate,
rhabdomyolysis with rising creatine kinase and hyperkalaemia, acute kidney injury,
lipaemic plasma, and a progressive,
often refractory cardiac dysfunction — bradyarrhythmias,
a Brugada-like electrocardiographic pattern, and ultimately cardiovascular collapse.
Who is at risk, and how would you manage a suspected case?
The principal risk factors are high dose and prolonged duration,
critically ill patients, young children — which is why propofol is not recommended
for sedation of children in intensive care — and states of low carbohydrate and
high fat intake, catecholamine and corticosteroid administration,
and intercurrent critical illness with sepsis or head injury.
Management is first and foremost recognition and immediate cessation of propofol,
switching to an alternative sedative.
Then it is supportive and aggressive: treat the hyperkalaemia,
support the circulation, correct the acidosis,
and provide carbohydrate to suppress fat metabolism.
Renal replacement therapy or haemofiltration is used to clear the drug,
its lipid load, and the metabolic derangement,
and in the most severe cases of refractory cardiac failure,
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation has been used as a bridge.
The key examinable message is that prevention — vigilance about dose and duration,
and daily review of the cumulative dose — and early recognition are what save lives.
Patients often complain of pain on injection.
Why does that happen and what can you do about it?
Pain on injection is common, reported in a substantial proportion of patients,
and is attributed to the aqueous free propofol in the emulsion irritating the
venous endothelium and activating the kallikrein-kinin system,
releasing bradykinin which sensitises the vein.
It is worse in small veins and better in large ones.
The most effective single measures are to use a large vein in the antecubital fossa
and to mix or precede the propofol with lidocaine — either adding lidocaine to the
syringe or giving it as a pre-treatment with a tourniquet,
the so-called venous retention technique.
Other strategies include using a formulation containing medium-chain as well as
long-chain triglycerides, which lowers the free aqueous propofol,
giving opioids beforehand, cooling or warming the drug, and diluting the solution.
In practice a combination of a large vein and lidocaine is what I would rely on.
Are there other adverse effects or cautions you have not yet mentioned?
A few worth noting. Propofol can colour the urine green or the hair, harmlessly,
through phenolic metabolites.
There is a long-standing teaching about egg and soya allergy:
the egg component is purified egg phosphatide derived from yolk,
not the egg-white proteins that cause most egg allergy,
and modern consensus is that propofol is not contraindicated in most patients with
egg or soya allergy, though caution and individual assessment remain sensible.
True anaphylaxis to propofol itself is rare.
The lipid load matters in prolonged infusions and must be counted in the patient's
nutritional balance, and it can cause hypertriglyceridaemia.
There is the excitatory movement on induction I mentioned.
And in the day-case setting its smooth,
clear-headed recovery and antiemetic effect are genuine advantages.
You raised the antiemetic effect. Is that clinically useful?
Yes. Propofol has a genuine antiemetic action,
probably through central dopaminergic and other mechanisms,
and a propofol-based total intravenous technique is associated with a lower
incidence of postoperative nausea and vomiting than a volatile-based technique.
Sub-hypnotic doses have even been used as rescue therapy for established nausea.
So in the patient at high risk of postoperative nausea and vomiting,
choosing total intravenous anaesthesia with propofol is itself a prophylactic
strategy, alongside the usual multimodal antiemetic measures.
How does propofol compare with thiopental, etomidate and ketamine for induction?
Each has a niche. Thiopental, a barbiturate,
has a rapid onset and was the traditional agent for rapid-sequence induction and
for status epilepticus, but it is a negative inotrope, can cause histamine release,
is contraindicated in porphyria, and accumulates with repeated dosing.
Etomidate gives the most cardiovascular stability at induction,
which suits the haemodynamically fragile patient,
but it suppresses adrenocortical steroid synthesis even after a single dose and
causes pain and myoclonus, so its use has narrowed.
Ketamine, an NMDA antagonist, provides analgesia and a degree of cardiovascular
stimulation through sympathetic activation, making it valuable in shock,
trauma and asthma, at the cost of emergence phenomena and raised secretions.
Propofol's advantages are its smooth induction, suppression of airway reflexes,
antiemesis and clear recovery; its disadvantage is haemodynamic depression.
So I choose by patient: propofol for the routine and the day case,
ketamine or etomidate for the shocked,
thiopental where its specific properties are wanted.
Let us consider special populations. Any particular concerns in obstetrics?
Propofol crosses the placenta but is rapidly cleared by the neonate,
and it is used for induction at caesarean section,
although thiopental was traditionally favoured and propofol can cause more maternal
hypotension and, in higher doses, neonatal depression.
In the lactating mother the amount transferred in milk is negligible and
breastfeeding need not be interrupted. The main intra-operative concern is the
maternal cardiovascular response and the need to secure the airway promptly given
the increased aspiration risk in pregnancy.
And in the patient with significant cardiac disease or hypovolaemia?
Here propofol's vasodilatation and myocardial depression are the central hazard,
and the blunting of the baroreflex removes the patient's compensatory tachycardia.
I would reduce the dose markedly, give it slowly and titrated,
ensure the patient is as well filled as is safe beforehand,
have a vasopressor and ideally an infusion of a vasoconstrictor ready,
and consider a co-induction technique to reduce the propofol requirement — for
example a small dose of an opioid or midazolam, or ketamine,
to provide some haemodynamic stability.
In the genuinely unstable patient many would choose an agent with a more favourable
cardiovascular profile, such as ketamine or etomidate,
for induction rather than propofol.
You have mentioned co-induction. What is the rationale, and give an example.
Co-induction is the deliberate use of a small dose of a second agent to reduce the
dose of the principal induction agent and so attenuate its dose-dependent adverse
effects, exploiting synergy.
A common example is a small dose of midazolam given before propofol,
which reduces the propofol induction requirement and may smooth induction;
another is a modest dose of an opioid,
which obtunds the response to laryngoscopy and reduces propofol need.
The trade-off is the potential for additive respiratory depression and for
prolonged or unpredictable recovery, so it must be used judiciously.
Why is propofol so favoured for day-case surgery in particular?
Because the qualities that matter most in day surgery are rapid,
clear-headed recovery, a low incidence of postoperative nausea and vomiting,
and minimal hangover — and propofol delivers all three.
Patients emerge with a sense of well-being, are quickly orientated,
and meet discharge criteria sooner,
while the antiemetic effect reduces the commonest cause of delayed discharge and
unplanned admission.
Combined with short-acting analgesics and a laryngeal mask,
a propofol technique supports the efficient turnover and high-quality recovery that
ambulatory surgery demands.
What drug interactions matter most when you give propofol?
The most clinically important is pharmacodynamic synergy with opioids:
propofol and an opioid such as remifentanil act synergistically on hypnosis and on
the suppression of responses to stimulation,
so the dose of each can be markedly reduced when combined — which is the whole
basis of balanced total intravenous anaesthesia,
but also why the combination produces more profound respiratory depression,
hypotension and bradycardia than either alone.
There is similar synergy with benzodiazepines.
Propofol's own metabolism is not greatly affected by most drugs because of its high
extraction, but it can transiently raise the concentration of co-administered drugs
by reducing cardiac output and hepatic blood flow.
Practically, I anticipate exaggerated cardiovascular and respiratory depression
whenever propofol is combined with opioids, benzodiazepines or other anaesthetics,
and I titrate accordingly.
What is the effect on intra-ocular pressure, and where is that useful?
Propofol lowers intra-ocular pressure, by around a third from baseline,
and it obtunds the rise in intra-ocular pressure that accompanies laryngoscopy and
intubation better than thiopental does.
That makes it a good choice for ophthalmic surgery and for the patient with a
penetrating eye injury, where a sudden rise in pressure risks extrusion of
intra-ocular contents — though in that specific scenario the choice of muscle
relaxant and the avoidance of coughing matter at least as much as the induction
agent.
Is propofol suitable for electroconvulsive therapy?
It is used, but with a caveat. Propofol has anticonvulsant properties and tends to
shorten the induced seizure compared with agents such as etomidate or methohexital,
and adequate seizure duration is part of the therapeutic effect.
So while propofol gives a smooth induction and recovery for electroconvulsive
therapy, the dose is kept modest and the seizure duration monitored;
if seizures are inadequate, an alternative induction agent may be preferred.
Its smooth haemodynamics and antiemesis are nonetheless advantages in this
repeatedly anaesthetised population.
There is a governance and safety issue around propofol among practitioners.
What do you mean?
Propofol has a recognised potential for misuse and dependence,
and there have been deaths among healthcare workers, including anaesthetists,
who self-administered it — drawn by its rapid,
pleasant hypnosis and the false sense that its short action makes it safe.
It has no reversal agent, the margin between sedation and apnoea is narrow,
and self-administration is rapidly fatal without an airway.
The professional response is controlled-drug-style stock control in some
institutions, accounting for propofol use and wastage,
awareness of the signs of substance misuse in colleagues,
and a supportive route to help.
It is an examinable point because it links pharmacology to professional duty and
patient and practitioner safety.
How would you investigate a suspected anaphylactic reaction at induction when
propofol was one of the drugs given?
At the time, I would manage it as anaphylaxis — stop the likely triggers,
call for help, give oxygen and adrenaline, fluids,
and follow the established algorithm — and take timed mast-cell tryptase samples,
ideally at presentation, at one to two hours, and a baseline later.
Afterwards I would refer the patient to a specialist allergy clinic for skin-prick
and intradermal testing to the suspected agents,
documenting the reaction clearly and warning the patient.
With propofol specifically, true anaphylaxis is rare,
and the historical fear of cross-reactivity with egg or soya allergy is now thought
to be overstated, so I would not assume propofol was the culprit without testing —
neuromuscular blocking drugs and antibiotics are statistically far more likely.
Tell me a little more about induction in children.
Where intravenous access is established,
propofol gives a smooth induction in children,
but the dose per kilogram is higher than in adults — often three to four milligrams
per kilogram in the unpremedicated child — because of the larger central
compartment and higher clearance.
Pain on injection is a particular nuisance in children and lidocaine pre-treatment
is routine. For maintenance, target-controlled models such as the paediatric
Kataria or Paedfusor models exist.
The cardinal restriction, which I would emphasise,
is that propofol is not licensed or recommended for prolonged sedation of children
in the intensive care unit because of their heightened susceptibility to propofol
infusion syndrome.
If profound bradycardia or asystole occurs after a propofol and remifentanil
induction, how do you respond?
I would treat it immediately as a bradyarrhythmia from combined vagotonic effect:
stop further drug delivery, ensure oxygenation and ventilation,
give an antimuscarinic such as atropine or glycopyrronium,
and if there is no rapid response or there is asystole,
proceed without delay to the resuscitation algorithm with chest compressions and
adrenaline.
Prevention is better — anticipating this in the patient with high vagal tone or on
beta-blockade, considering an antimuscarinic or a small dose of vagolytic
beforehand, and titrating both drugs rather than giving large boluses together.
Does propofol affect uterine tone, and why might that matter?
Unlike the volatile agents, propofol at clinical concentrations has little direct
relaxant effect on uterine smooth muscle,
whereas volatiles cause dose-dependent uterine relaxation that can worsen bleeding
at caesarean delivery.
So a propofol-based maintenance can be advantageous where uterine tone is
important, for example in a patient at risk of haemorrhage,
while still allowing the obstetric team to use uterotonics effectively.
Conversely, where uterine relaxation is wanted,
such as for manual replacement of an inverted uterus,
a volatile or a dedicated tocolytic would be chosen.
What monitoring do you regard as mandatory when running a propofol total
intravenous anaesthetic?
I would apply the full standard of monitoring required for any general anaesthetic
— continuous pulse oximetry, electrocardiography,
non-invasive or invasive arterial pressure, capnography,
airway gas and agent analysis where a volatile might be present,
and temperature for longer cases — present from before induction until recovery.
For total intravenous anaesthesia specifically I add two things.
First, a clearly visible, dedicated and protected infusion line with the cannula
site in view, anti-reflux and anti-siphon valves,
so that disconnection or tissuing is detected promptly.
Second, processed electroencephalographic depth-of-anaesthesia monitoring,
which the relevant guidelines recommend whenever a total intravenous technique is
combined with neuromuscular blockade,
precisely because the usual signs of light anaesthesia are then masked.
I would also confirm the pump is programmed with the correct model,
patient data and target before starting.
Pull it together for me. Outline how you would conduct a propofol-based anaesthetic
for a two-hour case in a patient at high risk of postoperative nausea and vomiting.
I would choose total intravenous anaesthesia with propofol precisely because it
lowers the baseline risk of nausea and vomiting.
After full monitoring and pre-oxygenation,
I would establish a reliable large-bore cannula, pre-treat with lidocaine,
and induce using an effect-site target-controlled infusion with the Schnider or
Eleveld model, co-administering remifentanil for analgesia and to blunt the airway
response.
I would secure the airway, then maintain with propofol titrated to a depth-monitor
target in the forty-to-sixty range, adjusting for surgical stimulation,
and run remifentanil to control the haemodynamic response.
I would give multimodal analgesia and additional antiemetic prophylaxis — for
instance dexamethasone after induction and ondansetron towards the end — knowing
the propofol technique is itself contributing.
I would maintain normothermia and normovolaemia,
watch the cumulative propofol dose,
and plan a longer-acting analgesic to cover the rapid offset of remifentanil.
Emergence should be clear-headed and the patient should reach discharge criteria
promptly with a low likelihood of nausea.
One more point of depth: what is the rate constant ke0,
and why does it matter for effect-site targeting?
The ke0 is the first-order rate constant that describes the equilibration of drug
between the plasma and the effect site — in effect,
how quickly the brain concentration catches up with the blood concentration.
It is often expressed as the time to peak effect or as the blood-brain
equilibration half-time.
It matters because the clinical effect of propofol lags behind the plasma
concentration, so when I set an effect-site target the pump deliberately overshoots
the plasma concentration to drive drug across that gradient quickly,
then lets plasma fall as the effect site fills.
A model with a faster ke0 reaches peak effect sooner.
Understanding ke0 explains why effect-site targeting gives a faster,
smoother induction than plasma targeting,
and why the predicted plasma and effect-site numbers on the pump differ during the
early, dynamic phase.
How does obesity change the way you dose propofol?
Obesity is a good example of why the dosing scalar matters.
For the induction bolus I would not use total body weight,
because that risks a large overdose and profound hypotension;
lean body weight or adjusted body weight is the appropriate scalar for the bolus,
titrated to effect.
For maintenance, however, the larger absolute volume of distribution and increased
clearance in obesity mean that dosing purely on lean weight can under-dose,
so a weight scalar intermediate between lean and total — adjusted body weight — is
generally used, again titrated against depth monitoring.
The target-controlled models handle this differently:
the Schnider model uses lean body mass and can behave erratically at extremes of
weight, whereas the Eleveld model was specifically derived to perform across a wide
range of body habitus, so many would prefer it in the obese patient.
The overarching principle is to titrate to effect with depth monitoring rather than
to trust any single weight-based number.
We are increasingly mindful of the environmental footprint of anaesthesia.
Where does propofol sit?
This is an important contemporary point.
Volatile agents, particularly desflurane and nitrous oxide,
are potent greenhouse gases with high global warming potential,
and a total intravenous technique with propofol avoids that atmospheric burden — so
from the perspective of greenhouse emissions propofol is favourable and fits the
Greener health-service agenda.
However, propofol is not without environmental cost: it is an aquatic pollutant,
it is not fully removed by conventional sewage treatment,
and waste propofol and the plastic and lipid waste stream have their own footprint.
So the responsible position is that propofol-based anaesthesia reduces the
climate-change impact relative to volatiles, but that we should still avoid waste,
dispose of unused drug correctly rather than down the sink,
and not draw up more than we need.
Finally, are you aware of any prodrug or alternative formulations?
Yes.
Fospropofol is a water-soluble prodrug of propofol,
a phosphate ester that is hydrolysed by alkaline phosphatase to release active
propofol; it was developed to avoid the lipid emulsion and the pain on injection,
though it has a slower onset and offset and is associated with perineal
paraesthesia, and it is not in widespread use.
There are also lipid-free and microemulsion formulations,
and formulations using mixed medium- and long-chain triglycerides to reduce
injection pain. None has displaced the standard lipid emulsion in routine practice,
but they appear in the literature and are worth knowing.
Thank you. That is a very thorough account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Propofol is two-six di-isopropylphenol in a lipid emulsion;
it is a pure hypnotic with no analgesia,
acting mainly by potentiating the GABA-A receptor.
Second, Recovery from a bolus is by redistribution, not elimination;
its clearance exceeds hepatic blood flow,
indicating significant extrahepatic — especially pulmonary — metabolism.
Third, The favourable, relatively flat context-sensitive half-time makes propofol
ideal for total intravenous anaesthesia and prolonged sedation.
Fourth, Dose-dependent hypotension, baroreflex blunting,
apnoea and depression of airway reflexes dominate the side-effect profile;
reduce and titrate the dose in the elderly, hypovolaemic and cardiac patient.
Fifth, Propofol infusion syndrome — high dose beyond forty-eight hours,
mitochondrial failure, acidosis, rhabdomyolysis,
cardiac collapse — is prevented by vigilance over cumulative dose and treated by
immediate cessation and aggressive support.
Thank you. That concludes the station.